Adaptive and portable sun shade with automated compensation of sun movement


Sun umbrellas are one of the most extensively used commodities in our century, having been used for many years at beaches, resorts, residences, or swimming pools, and are easily available to a wide variety of people. Although there was evidence of exponential development in engineering and technology in other fields, no one seemed particularly worried about making this simple home item better. The project's mission is to design the "B-Matic Shade," a sunshade that has been upgraded to integrate autonomous functionality to this common product.
The objective has been summed up as "Set it and forget it," meaning no interaction with the user after the device setup. The umbrella provides continuous shade to a person sitting on a chair at the beach by detecting sun movement through light-dependent resistor sensors, whose data is sent to and processed by a microcontroller. The microcontroller then instructs the motor, which rotates the shade around a single axis to its desired position. All of this is powered by a built-in battery that will be recharged by a solar panel mounted on top of the shade. The system only activates the motor once every 10 minutes due to the slow motion of the sun and to minimize power consumption on the battery. There is also a supporting mechanism that keeps the shade fixed while the shade is not rotating by directly locking in the teeth of the gear mechanism. The 36:1 gear ratio employed in the construction of this product offers it the advantage of being able to use a smaller motor and other electrical components, resulting in a lightweight, durable, and optimum design.
The design process has been focused in making this device lightweight, extremely portable, energy-efficient, and safe for use by incorporating all electrical devices, wiring systems, and gear mechanisms in a fully enclosed housing that protects it from dust and water. This project is the result of four engineers from a variety of major working together in their specialties.
